1. What Is a Daemon?

👉 A daemon (pronounced “dee-mon”) is a background process that runs continuously, usually without direct user interaction.

It performs system-level or service-related tasks automatically — for example, handling network requests, logging, scheduling, etc.

💡 Key Idea

A daemon is a user-space process (not part of the kernel) that provides a service to the system or other applications, often starting at boot time and running in the background.

⚙️ 2. Daemon Characteristics
Property	Description
Runs in background	Does not have a controlling terminal
Started by init/systemd	Usually starts at boot automatically
Long-lived	Keeps running as long as the system is up
Provides services	e.g., networking, printing, logging
User-space process	Runs on top of kernel, not inside it
🧩 3. Common Examples of Daemons
Daemon Name	Function
systemd	Master service manager; starts and monitors all other daemons
sshd	Handles SSH (remote login) connections
crond	Executes scheduled tasks (cron jobs)
udevd	Manages device nodes when hardware is added/removed
syslogd	Logs system messages
networkd / NetworkManager	Manages network interfaces and configurations
dbus-daemon	Enables inter-process communication (IPC) between system components

🧠 All these daemons communicate with the kernel through system calls.

⚙️ 4. How Daemons Start

At boot time:

The kernel initializes hardware and mounts the root filesystem.

It starts PID 1 — the init process (in modern systems, it’s systemd).

systemd (or init) then:

Starts daemons (like sshd, udevd, dbus-daemon).

Manages their restart, dependencies, and logs.

So daemons = user-space helpers that rely on the kernel for system-level tasks.

🧠 5. Daemon vs Kernel Process
Aspect	Daemon	Kernel Process
Runs in	User space	Kernel space
Started by	init or systemd	Kernel itself
Purpose	Provides system services (logging, networking)	Manages CPU, memory, devices
Access to hardware	Indirect (via syscalls)	Direct
Example	sshd, crond	ksoftirqd, kworker, kswapd
⚙️ 6. Viewing Daemons in Action
🔹 To list all daemons (system services):
systemctl list-units --type=service

🔹 To check a specific one (e.g., SSH):
systemctl status sshd

🔹 To see background processes:
ps -ef | grep daemon


You’ll see many like:

root       624     1  0 08:00 ? 00:00:01 sshd: /usr/sbin/sshd -D
root       400     1  0 08:00 ? 00:00:00 systemd-udevd

🧠 7. How It Connects to Kernel and Memory Layout

The kernel manages hardware and provides APIs via system calls.

Daemons use those syscalls to provide higher-level OS services (like networking or logging).

Together, they make up the full Operating System environment.

So:

Kernel = "engine"

Daemons = "background assistants"

Shell / User programs = "drivers/users"

✅ Interview-Style One-Liner

A daemon is a long-running background process in user space that provides system or service-level functionality (like networking, logging, or scheduling). It starts during boot (usually by systemd), runs without a terminal, and communicates with the kernel using system calls.
